=head1 NAME

HTML::Mason::Admin - Mason Administrator's Guide

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This guide is intended for the sys admin/web master in charge of
installing, configuring, or tuning a Mason system.

=head1 GLOBAL SETTINGS FILE

Mason/Config.pm contains global settings for your system, such as the
presence or absence of certain optional modules.

Makefile.PL initially creates Config.pm based on your environment,
placing it in the C<lib/HTML/Mason> subdirectory of the distribution.
After that, you can edit it by hand, following the comments inside.

"make install" copies Config.pm to your Perl library directory
(e.g. C</usr/lib/perl5/site_perl/HTML/Mason>) along with the other module
files. This allows Mason internally to grab the configuration data
with "C<use HTML::Mason::Config>".

When upgrading from a previous version, "make install" will
maintain the previous Config.pm values.

=head1 SITE CONFIGURATION METHODS

The next three sections discuss ways to configure a Mason site:

* Minimal configuration, relying on default Mason behavior. Simplest and least flexible.

* Configuration via httpd.conf directives. Medium complexity and flexibility.

* Configuration via handler.pl. Most complex but most flexible.

We recommend that you start with the simplest method and work your
way forward as the need for flexibility arises.

=head1 MINIMAL CONFIGURATION

Directives must be added to httpd.conf or srm.conf to specify which
requests to handle through Mason. A simple configuration looks like:

    DocumentRoot /usr/local/www/htdocs
    PerlRequire /usr/local/mason/handler.pl
    DefaultType text/html
    <Location />
        SetHandler perl-script
        PerlHandler HTML::Mason
        MasonCompRoot "/usr/local/www/htdocs"
        MasonDataDir "/usr/local/www/mason"
    </Location>

The I<component root> (specified by MasonCompRoot) is the top of your
tree of component source files. In simple configurations the component
root is the same as the server's DocumentRoot.  More complex
configurations may specify several different DocumentRoots under a
single component root.

When Mason handles a request, the request filename
(C<$r-E<gt>filename>) must be underneath your component root -- that
way Mason has a legitimate component to start with.  If the filename
is not underneath the component root, Mason will place a warning in
the error logs and return 404.

The I<data directory> (specified by MasonDataDir) is a writable
directory that Mason uses to implement various features and
optimizations. Mason will create the directory on startup, if necessary,
and set its permissions according to the web server User/Group.

=head2 CONFIGURATION VIA httpd.conf DIRECTIVES

Mason's configuration parameters are set via mod_perl's C<PerlSetVar>
and C<PerlAddVar> directives.  Though these parameters are all strings,
Mason treats them in different ways.  The different parameter types
are:

=over 4

=item * string

The variable's value is simply taken literally and used.  Quotes are
necessary if the string contains spaces.

=item * boolean

The variable's value is used as a boolean, and is subject to Perl's
rules on truth/falseness.  It is recommended that you use 0 (false) or
1 (true) for these arguments.

=item * code

The string is treated as a piece of code.  This is used for parameters
that expect code references.  For example, an anonymous subroutine
might look like:

 PerlSetVar  MasonDieHandler  "sub { die join ' -- ', @_ }"

A named subroutine call must be wrapped in an anonymous subroutine:

 PerlSetVar  MasonDieHandler  "sub { Carp::croak(@_) }"

=item * list

To set a list parameter, use C<PerlSetVar> for the first value and
then C<PerlAddVar> for all subsequent values, like this:

 PerlSetVar  MasonPreloads  /foo/bar/baz.comp
 PerlAddVar  MasonPreloads  /foo/bar/quux.comp

=back

Almost all of Mason's configuration parameters correspond to new()
parameters for the B<L<HTML::Mason::Parser>>,
B<L<HTML::Mason::Interp>>, and B<L<HTML::Mason::ApacheHandler>>
objects. Configuration parameters are named predictably by taking the
mixed-caps form of the new() parameter and prefixing "Mason".  For
example, comp_root becomes MasonCompRoot and data_dir becomes
MasonDataDir.

=head2 Parser Parameters

=over 4

=item * MasonAllowGlobals - list

Corresponds to the C<allow_globals> parameter.

=item * MasonDefaultEscapeFlags - string

Corresponds to the C<default_escape_flags> parameter.

=item * MasonIgnoreWarningsExpr - string

Corresponds to the C<ignore_warnings_expr> parameter.

=item * MasonInPackage - string

Corresponds to the C<in_package> parameter.

=item * MasonPostamble - string

Corresponds to the C<postamble> parameter.

=item * MasonPreamble - string

Corresponds to the C<preamble> parameter.

=item * MasonUseStrict - boolean

Corresponds to the C<use_strict> parameter.

=item * MasonPreprocess - code

Corresponds to the C<preprocess> parameter.

=item * MasonPostprocess - code

Corresponds to the C<postprocess> parameter.

=back

=head2 Interp Parameters

=over 4

=item * MasonCompRoot - string or list

Correponds to the C<comp_root> parameter.  This parameter can either
be a single value, such as '/foo/comp/root', or a list of keys and
values such as:

 PerlSetVar  MasonCompRoot  "root1 => /foo/comp/root1"
 PerlAddVar  MasonCompRoot  "shared => /my/shared/comps"

See the L<Multiple component roots> section for more details on
multiple component roots.

=item * MasonDataDir - string (required)

Corresponds to the C<data_dir> parameter.

=item * MasonAllowRecursiveAutohandlers - boolean

Corresponds to the C<allow_recursive_autohandlers> parameter.

=item * MasonAutohandlerName - string

Corresponds to the C<autohandler_name> parameter.

=item * MasonCodeCacheMaxSize - string

Corresponds to the C<code_cache_max_size> parameter.

=item * MasonCurrentTime - string

Corresponds to the C<current_time> parameter.

=item * MasonDataCacheDir - string

Corresponds to the C<data_cache_dir> parameter.

=item * MasonDieHandler - code or 0

Corresponds to the C<die_handler> parameter.

=item * MasonMaxRecurse - string

Corresponds to the C<max_recurse> parameter.

=item * MasonOutMethod - code

Corresponds to the C<out_method> parameter.

=item * MasonOutMode - string

Corresponds to the C<out_mode> parameter.

=item * MasonPreloads - list

Corresponds to the C<preloads> parameter.

=item * MasonStaticFileRoot - string

Corresponds to the C<static_file_root> parameter.

=item * MasonSystemLogEvents - string

Corresponds to the C<system_log_events> parameter.

=item * MasonSystemLogFile - string

Corresponds to the C<system_log_file> parameter.

=item * MasonSystemLogSeparator - string

Corresponds to the C<system_log_separator> parameter.

=item * MasonUseDataCache - boolean

Corresponds to the C<use_data_cache> parameter.

=item * MasonUseObjectFiles - boolean

Corresponds to the C<use_object_files> parameter.

=item * MasonUseReloadFile - boolean

Corresponds to the C<use_reload_file> parameter.

=back

=head2 ApacheHandler Parameters

=over 4

=item * MasonApacheStatusTitle - string

Correponds to the C<apache_status_title> parameter.

=item * MasonAutoSendHeaders - boolean

Correponds to the C<auto_send_headers> parameter.

=item * MasonErrorMode - string

Correponds to the C<error_mode> parameter.

=item * MasonTopLevelPredicate - code

Correponds to the C<top_level_predicate> parameter.

=back

=head2 Special Parameters

These are the only parameters that do I<not> correspond to new() parameters.

=over 4

=item * MasonArgsMethod - string

Valid values for this parameter are C<CGI> or C<mod_perl>.  This
determines whether to use the C<CGI> or C<Apache::Request> module for
argument handling.  Please see L<HTML::Mason::ApacheHandler/PARAMETERS TO THE use() DECLARATION>
for more details.

This can only be set once, regardless of how you set
MasonMultipleConfig.

Defaults to C<CGI>.

=item * MasonMultipleConfig - boolean

If this parameter is true, Mason assumes that you may have multiple
sets of configuration directives defined, perhaps for multiple
locations or virtual hosts.  This means that Mason will create a new
set of parser/interp/handler objects for every request.  If this
parameter is false, Mason simply creates a single set at server
startup to maximize shared memory. Defaults to false.

If you set this option, the Apache child processes will need
the proper permissions to create the data directories.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURING MASON VIA A HANDLER SCRIPT

For maximum flexibility, you may choose to write a custom script to
create your Mason objects and handle requests. In our documentation
and examples we call this script handler.pl, though you may name it
whatever you like.

The handler.pl file is responsible for creating the three Mason
objects and supplying the many parameters that control how your
components are parsed and executed. It also provides the opportunity
to execute arbitrary code at three important junctures: the server
initialization, the beginning of a request, and the end of a request.
A wide set of behaviors can be implemented with a mere few lines of
well-placed Perl in your handler.pl.  In this section we present the
basics of setting up handler.pl as well as some ideas for more
advanced applications.

=head2 Creating the Mason objects

C<handler.pl> creates three Mason objects: the Parser, Interpreter,
and ApacheHandler. The Parser compiles components into Perl
subroutines; the Interpreter executes those compiled components; and
the Apache handler routes mod_perl requests to Mason.  These objects
are created once in the parent httpd and then copied to each child
process.

These objects have a fair number of possible parameters. Only two of
them are required, I<comp_root> and I<data_dir>; these are discussed
in the next two subsections. The various parameters are documented in
the individual reference manuals for each object:
B<L<HTML::Mason::Parser>>, B<L<HTML::Mason::Interp>>, and
B<L<HTML::Mason::ApacheHandler>>.

The advantage of embedding these parameters in objects is that
advanced configurations can create more than one set of objects,
choosing which set to use at request time.  For example, suppose you
have a staging site and a production site running on the same web
server, distinguishing between them with a configuration variable
called C<version>:

    # Create Mason objects for staging site
    my $parser1 = new HTML::Mason::Parser;
    my $interp1 = new HTML::Mason::Interp (parser=>$parser1, ...);
    my $ah1 = new HTML::Mason::ApacheHandler (interp=>$interp1);

    # Create Mason objects for production site
    my $parser2 = new HTML::Mason::Parser;
    my $interp2 = new HTML::Mason::Interp (parser=>$parser2, ...);
    my $ah2 = new HTML::Mason::ApacheHandler (interp=>$interp2);

    sub handler {
        ...

        # Choose the right ApacheHandler
        if ($r->dir_config('version') eq ' staging') {
            $ah1->handle_request($r);
        } else {
            $ah2->handle_request($r);
        }
    }

=head2 Multiple component roots

You may specify multiple component roots to be searched in the spirit
of Perl's C<@INC>. To do so you must specify a list of lists:

    comp_root => [[key1, root1], [key2, root2], ...]

Each pair consists of a key and root.  The key is a string that
identifies the root mnemonically to a component developer. Keys
are case-insensitive and must be distinct.

For example:

    comp_root => [[private=>'/usr/home/joe/comps'], [main=>'/usr/local/www/htdocs']]

This specifies two component roots, a main component tree and a
private tree which overrides certain components.  The order is
respected ala C<@INC>, so I<private> is searched first and I<main> second.
(I chose the C<=E<gt>> notation here because it looks cleaner, but note that
this is a list of lists, not a hash.)

The key has several purposes. Object and data cache filenames use the
(uppercased) key to make sure different components sharing the same path have
different cache and object files. For example, if a component /foo/bar
is found in 'private', then the object file will be

    <data_dir>/obj/PRIVATE/foo/bar

and the cache file

    <data_dir>/cache/PRIVATE+2ffoo+2fbar

The key is also included whenever Mason prints the component title, as
in an error message:

    error while executing /foo/bar [private]:
    ...

This lets you know which version of the component was running.

=head2 External modules

Components will often need access to external Perl modules. Any such
modules that export symbols should be listed in handler.pl, rather
than the standard practice of using a PerlModule configuration
directive. This is because components are executed inside the
B<HTML::Mason::Commands> package, and can only access symbols exported
to that package. Here's sample module list:

    { package HTML::Mason::Commands;
      use CGI ':standard';
      use LWP::UserAgent;
      ... }

In any case, for optimal memory utilization, make sure all Perl
modules are used in the parent process, and I<not> in
components. Otherwise, each child allocates its own copy and you lose
the benefit of shared memory between parent processes and their
children. See Vivek Khera's mod_perl tuning FAQ (perl.apache.org/tuning)
for details.

=head2 File ownership

Unix web servers that run on privileged ports like 80 start with a root
parent process, then spawn children running as the 'User' and 'Group'
specified in httpd.conf. This difference leads to permission errors
when child processes try to write files or directories created by the
parent process.

To work around this conflict, Mason remembers all directories and
files created at startup, returning them in response to
C<interp-E<gt>files_written>. This list can be fed to a chown() at the
end of the startup code in C<handler.pl>:

    chown (Apache->server->uid, Apache->server->gid, $interp->files_written);

=head2 Persistent user sessions

With just a few lines in handler.pl you can make a global hash
(e.g. I<%session>) available to all components containing persistent user
session data.  If you set a value in the hash, you will see the change
in future visits by the same user.  The key piece is Jeffrey Baker's
B<Apache::Session> module, available from CPAN.

The file F<eg/session_handler.pl> in the distribution contains the
lines to activate cookie-based sessions using Apache::Session and
CGI::Cookie. You can use F<eg/session_handler.pl> as your new handler.pl
base, or just copy out the appropriate pieces to your existing handler.pl.

The session code is customizable; you can change the user ID location
(e.g. URL instead of cookie), the user data storage mechanism
(e.g. DBI database), and the name of the global hash.

=head2 Using global variables

Global variables generally make programs harder to read, maintain, and
debug, and this is no less true for Mason.  Due to the persistent
mod_perl environment, globals require extra initialization and cleanup
care. And the highly modular nature of Mason pages does not mix well
with globals: it is no fun trying to track down which of twenty
components is stepping on your variable. With the ability to pass
parameters and declare lexical (C<my>) variables in components, there
is very little need for globals at all.

That said, there are times when it is very useful to make a value
available to all Mason components: a DBI database handler, a hash of
user session information, the server root for forming absolute URLs.
Usually you initialize the global in your handler.pl, either outside
the handler() subroutine (if you only need to set it once) or inside
(if you need to set it every request).

Mason by default parses components in C<strict> mode, so you can't
simply start referring to a new global or you'll get a fatal
warning. The solution is to invoke C<use vars> inside the
package that components execute in, by default B<HTML::Mason::Commands>:

    { package HTML::Mason::Commands;
      use vars qw($dbh %session);
    }

Alternatively you can use the L<Parser/allow_globals> parameter or method:

    my $parser = new HTML::Mason::Parser (..., allow_globals => [qw($dbh %session)]);
    $parser->allow_globals(qw($foo @bar))

The only advantage to C<allow_globals> is that it will do
the right thing if you've chosen a different package for components
to run in (via the L<Parser/in_package> Parser parameter.)

Similarly, to initialize the variable in handler.pl, you need to
set it in the component package:

   $HTML::Mason::Commands::dbh = DBI->connect(...);

Alternatively you can use the L<Interp/set_global> Interp method:

    $interp->set_global(dbh => DBI->connect(...));

Again, C<set_global> will do the right thing if you've chosen a
different package for components.

Now when referring to these globals inside components, you can use the
plain variable name:

    $dbh->prepare...

=head2 Declining image requests

Mason should be prevented from serving images, tarballs, and other
binary files as regular components. Such a file may inadvertently
contain a Mason character sequence such as "<%", causing an error.

There are several ways to restrict which file types are handled by Mason.
One way is with a line at the top of handler(), e.g.:

    return -1 if $r->content_type && $r->content_type !~ m|^text/|i;

This line allows text/html and text/plain to pass through but not much
else.  It is included (commented out) in the default handler.pl.

Another way is specifying a filename pattern in the Apache
configuration, e.g.:

    <FilesMatch "(\.html|\.txt|^[^\.]+)$>
    SetHandler perl-script
    PerlHandler HTML::Mason
    </FilesMatch>

This directs Mason to handle only files with .html, .txt, or no extension.

=head2 Securing top-level components

Users may exploit a server-side scripting environment by invoking
scripts with malicious or unintended arguments. Mason administrators
need to be particularly wary of this because of the tendency to break
out "subroutines" into individually accessible file components.

For example, a Mason developer might create a helpful shared component
for performing sql queries:

    $m->comp('sql_select', table=>'employee', where=>'id=315');

This is a perfectly reasonable component to create and call internally,
but clearly presents a security risk if accessible via URL:

    http://www.foo.com/sql_select?table=credit_cards&where=*

Of course a web user would have to obtain the name of this component
through guesswork or other means, but obscurity alone does not
properly secure a system.  Rather, you should choose a site-wide
policy for distinguishing top-level components from private
components, and make sure your developers stick to this policy. You
can then prevent private components from being served.

One solution is to place all private components inside a directory,
say /private, that lies under the component root but outside the
document root.

Another solution is to decide on a naming convention, for example,
that all private components begin with "_", or that all top-level
components must end in ".html". Then turn all private requests away
with a 404 NOT_FOUND (rather than, say, a 403 FORBIDDEN which would
provide more information than necessary). Use either an Apache directive

    PerlModule Apache::Constants
    <FilesMatch "^_">
    SetHandler perl-script
    PerlInitHandler Apache::Constants::NOT_FOUND
    </FilesMatch>

or a handler.pl directive:

    return 404 if $r->filename =~ m{^_[^/]+$};

Even after you've safely protected internal components, top-level
components that process arguments (such as form handlers) still
present a risk. Users can invoke such a component with arbitrary
argument values via a handcrafted query string. Always check incoming
arguments for validity and never place argument values directly into
SQL, shell commands, etc. Unfortunately, Mason does not yet work with
with Perl's taint checking which would help ensure these principles.

=head2 Allowing directory requests

By default Mason will decline requests for directories, leaving Apache
to serve up a directory index or a FORBIDDEN as appropriate.
Unfortunately this rule applies even if there is a dhandler in the
directory: /foo/bar/dhandler does not get a chance to
handle a request for /foo/bar.

If you would like Mason to handle directory requests, do the
following:

1. Set the L<ApacheHandler/decline_dirs> ApacheHandler parameter to 0.

2. If your handler.pl contains the standard "return -1" line to
decline non-text requests (as given in the previous section), add a
clause allowing directory types:

    return -1 if $r->content_type && $r->content_type !~ m|^text/|i
                 && $r->content_type !~ m|directory$|i;

The dhandler that catches a directory request is responsible for
setting a reasonable content type.

=head1 STANDARD FEATURES

This section explains how standard Mason features work and how to
administer them.

=head2 Data caching

Data caching is implemented with DeWitt Clinton's C<Cache::Cache>
module.  For full understanding of this section you should read the
documentation for C<Cache::Cache> as well as for relevant subclasses
(e.g. C<Cache::FileCache>).

=over

=item Cache files

By default, C<Cache::FileCache> is the subclass used for data caching,
although this may be overriden by the developer. C<Cache::FileCache>
creates a separate subdirectory for every component that uses caching,
and one file some number of levels underneath that subdirectory for
each cached item.  The root of the cache tree is
C<data_dir/cache>. The name of the cache subdirectory for a component
is determined by the function C<HTML::Mason::Utils::data_cache_namespace>.

=item Default constructor options

Ordinarily, when C<$m-E<gt>cache> is called, Mason passes to the cache
constructor the C<namespace>, C<username>, and C<cache_root>
options, along with any other options given in the C<$m-E<gt>cache>
method.

You may specify other default constructor options with
the L<Interp/data_cache_defaults> Interp parameter.  For example,

    my $interp = new HTML::Mason::Interp (
       ...
       data_cache_defaults =>
          { cache_class => 'SizeAwareFileCache',
            cache_depth=>2,
            default_expires_in=>'1 hour' }
    );

The options passed to individual C<$m-E<gt>cache> calls override these
defaults.

=item Disabling data caching

If for some reason you want to disable data caching entirely, set
C<Interp/use_data_cache> to false. This causes all C<$m-E<gt>cache>
calls to return a C<Cache::NullCache> object, which correctly
implements the API but never stores data.

=back

=head2 Previewer

The previewer is a web based utility that allows site developers to:

=over

=item 1.

View a site under a variety of simulated client conditions: browser,
operating system, date, time of day, referer, etc.

=item 2.

View a debug trace of a page, showing the component call tree and
indicating which parts of the page are generated by which components.

=back

The web-based previewer interface (a single component, actually)
allows the developer to select a variety of options such as time,
browser, and display mode.  The set of these options together is
called a previewer configuration. Configurations can be saved under
one of several preview ports. For more information on how the
previewer is used, see B<L<HTML::Mason::Devel>>.

Follow these steps to activate the Previewer:

=over

=item 1.

Choose a set of preview ports, for example, 3001 to 3005.

=item 2.

In httpd.conf, put a Listen in for each port.  E.g.

  Listen your.site.ip.address:3001
  ...
  Listen your.site.ip.address:3005

You'll also probably want to restrict access to these ports in your
access.conf. If you have multiple site developers, it is helpful to
use username/password access control, since the previewer will use the
username to keep configurations separate.

=item 3.

In your C<handler.pl>, add the line

    use HTML::Mason::Preview;

somewhere underneath "use HTML::Mason". Then add code to your handler
routine to intercept Previewer requests on the ports defined
above. Your handler should end up looking like this:

    sub handler {
        my ($r) = @_;

        # Compute port number from Host header
        my $host = $r->header_in('Host');
        my ($port) = ($host =~ /:([0-9]+)$/);
        $port = 80 if (!defined($port));

        # Handle previewer request on special ports
        if ($port >= 3001 && $port <= 3005) {
            my $parser = new HTML::Mason::Parser(...);
            my $interp = new HTML::Mason::Interp(...);
            my $ah = new HTML::Mason::ApacheHandler (...);
            return HTML::Mason::Preview::handle_preview_request($r,$ah);
        } else {
            $ah->handle_request($r);    # else, normal request handler
        }
    }

The three "new" lines inside the if block should look exactly the same
as the lines at the top of C<handler.pl>. Note that these separate
Mason objects are created for a single request and discarded. The
reason is that the previewer may alter the objects' settings, so it is
safer to create new ones every time.

=item 4.

Copy the Previewer component ("samples/preview") to your component
root (you may want to place it at the top level so that
http://www.yoursite.com/preview calls up the previewer interface).
Edit the "CONFIGURATION" block at the top to conform to your own Mason
setup.

=back

To test whether the previewer is working: restart your server, go to the
previewer interface, and click "View".  You should see your site's home page.

=head2 System logs

Mason will log various events to a system log file if you so desire.
This can be useful for performance monitoring and debugging.

The format of the system log was designed to be easy to parse by
programs, although it is not unduly hard to read for humans.  Every
event is logged on one line. Each line consists of multiple fields
delimited by a common separator, by default ctrl-A. The first three
fields are always the same: time, the name of the event, and the
current pid ($$).  These are followed by one or more fields specific
to the event.

The events are:

 EVENT NAME	DESCRIPTION			EXTRA FIELDS

 REQ_START	start of HTTP request		request number, URL + query string
 REQ_END	end of HTTP request		request number, error flag (1 if
						error occurred, 0 otherwise)
 CACHE_READ	attempt to read from		component path, cache key, success
		data cache (C<$m-E<gt>cache>)	flag (1 if item found, 0 otherwise)
 CACHE_STORE	store to data cache		component path, cache key
 COMP_LOAD	component loaded into memory	component path
		for first time	

The request number is an incremental value that uniquely identifies
each request for a given child process. Use it to match up
REQ_START/REQ_END pairs.

To turn on logging, specify a string value to C<system_log_events>
containing one or more event names separated by '|'. In additional to
individual event names, the following names can be used to specify
multiple events:

 REQUEST = REQ_START | REQ_END
 CACHE = CACHE_READ | CACHE_STORE
 ALL = All events

For example, to log REQ_START, REQ_END, and COMP_LOAD events, you could use
    system_log_events => "REQUEST|COMP_LOAD"
Note that this is a string, not a set of constants or'd together.

B<Configuration Options>

By default, the system log will be placed in
data_dir/etc/system.log. You can change this with C<system_log_file>.

The default line separator is ctrl-A. The advantage of this separator
is that it is very unlikely to appear in any of the fields, making it
easy to split() the line.  The disadvantage is that it will not always
display, e.g. from a Unix shell, making the log harder to read
casually.  You can change the separator to any sequence of characters
with C<system_log_separator>.

The time on each log line will be of the form "seconds.microseconds"
if you are using Time::HiRes, and simply "seconds" otherwise.  See
C<Config.pm> section.

B<Sample Log Parser>

Here is a code skeleton for parsing the various events in a log.  You
can also find this in F<eg/parselog.pl> in the Mason distribution.

   open(LOG,"mason.log");
   while (<LOG>) {
       chomp;
       my (@fields) = split("\cA");
       my ($time,$event,$pid) = splice(@fields,0,3);
       if ($event eq 'REQ_START') {
           my ($reqnum,$url) = @fields;
           ...
       } elsif ($event eq 'REQ_END') {
           my ($reqnum,$errflag) = @fields;
           ...
       } elsif ($event eq 'CACHE_READ') {  
           my ($comp,$key,$hitflag) = @fields;
           ...
       } elsif ($event eq 'CACHE_STORE') { 
           my ($comp,$key) = @fields;
           ...
       } elsif ($event eq 'COMP_LOAD') {
           my ($comp) = @fields;
           ...
       } else {
           warn "unrecognized event type: $event\n";
       }
   }
   

B<Suggested Uses>

Performance: REQUEST events are useful for analyzing the performance
of all Mason requests occurring on your site, and identifying the
slowest requests. F<eg/perflog.pl> in the Mason distribution is a log
parser that outputs the average compute time of each unique URL, in
order from slowest to quickest.

Server activity: REQUEST events are useful for determining what
your web server children are working on, especially when you have a
runaway.  For a given process, simply tail the log and find the last
REQ_START event with that process id. (You can also use the Apache
status page for this.)

Cache efficiency: CACHE events are useful for monitoring cache "hit
rates" (number of successful reads over total number of reads) over
all components that use a data cache.  Because stores to a cache are
more expensive than reads, a high hit rate is essential for the cache
to have a beneficial effect. If a particular cache hit rate is too
low, you may want to consider changing how frequently it is expired or
whether to use it at all.

Load frequency: COMP_LOAD events are useful for monitoring your code
cache. Too many loads may indicate that your code cache is too small.
Also, if you can turn off the code cache for a short time, COMP_LOAD
events will tell you which components are loaded most often and thus
good candidates for preloading.

=head1 PERFORMANCE TUNING

This section explains Mason's various performance enhancements and how
to administer them.

=head2 Code cache

When Mason loads a component, it places it in a memory cache.

The maximum size of the cache is specified with the
L<Interp/code_cache_max_size> Interp parameter; default is 10MB.
When the cache fills up, Mason frees up space by discarding a
number of components. The discard algorithm is least frequently used
(LFU), with a periodic decay to gradually eliminate old frequency
information. In a nutshell, the components called most often in recent
history should remain in the cache.  Very large components (over 20%
of the maximum cache size) never get cached, on the theory that they
would force out too many other components.

Note that the "size" of a component in memory cannot literally be
measured.  It is estimated by the length of the source text plus some
overhead.  Your process growth will not match the code cache
size exactly.

You can monitor the performance of the memory cache by turning on
L<system logs> and counting the COMP_LOAD events. If these are
occurring frequently even for a long-running process, you may want to
increase the size of your code cache.

You can prepopulate the cache with components that you know will be
accessed often; see L<Preloading>. Note that preloaded components
possess no special status in the cache and can be discarded like any
others.

Naturally, a cache entry is invalidated if the corresponding component
source file changes.

To turn off code caching completely, set L<Interp/code_cache_max_size> to
0.

=head2 Object files

The in-memory code cache is only useful on a per-process basis.  Each
process must build and maintain its own cache. Shared memory caches
are conceivable in the future, but even those will not survive between
web server restarts.

As a secondary, longer-term cache mechanism, Mason stores a compiled
form of each component in an object file under
C<data_dir/obj/I<component-path>>. Any server process can eval the
object file and save time on parsing the component source file.  The
object file is recreated whenever the source file changes.

Besides improving performance, object files are essential for
debugging and interpretation of errors.  Line numbers in error
messages are given in terms of the object file. The curious-minded can
peek inside an object file to see exactly how Mason converted
a given component to a Perl object.

If you change any Parser options, you must remove object files
previously created under that parser for the changes to take effect.

If for some reason you don't want Mason to create object files, set
the L<Interp/use_object_files> Interp parameter to 0.

=head2 Preloading

You can tell Mason to preload a set of components in the parent
process, rather than loading them on demand, using the
L<Interp/preloads> Interp parameter.  Each child server will start
with those components loaded in the memory cache. The trade-offs are:

=over

=item time

a small one-time startup cost, but children save time by not
having to load the components

=item memory

a fatter initial server, but the memory for preloaded components are
shared by all children.  This is similar to the advantage of using
modules only in the parent process.

=back

Try to preload components that are used frequently and do not change
often.  (If a preloaded component changes, all the children will have
to reload it from scratch.)

=head2 Reload file

Normally, every time Mason executes a component, it checks the last
modified time of its source file to see if it needs to be reloaded.
These file checks are convenient for development, but for a production
site they degrade performance unnecessarily.

To remedy this, Mason has an accelerated mode that changes its
behavior in two ways:

1.  Does not check component source files at all, relying solely on
object files.  This means the developer or an automated system is
responsible for recompiling any components that change and recreating
object files, using the L<Parser/make_component> Parser method.

2.  Rather than continuously checking whether object files have
changed, Mason monitors a "reload file" containing an ever-growing
list of components that have changed.  Whenever a component changes,
the developer or an automated system is responsible for appending the
component path to the reload file. The reload file is kept in
C<data_dir/etc/reload.lst>.

You can activate this mode with the L<Interp/use_reload_file>
Interp method.

The advantage of using this mode is that Mason stats one file per
request instead of ten or twenty.  The disadvantage is a
increase in maintenance costs as the object and reload files have to
be kept up-to-date.  Automated editorial tools, and cron jobs that
periodically scan the component hierarchy for changes, are two
possible solutions.  The Mason content management system automatically
handles this task.

=head1 STAGING vs. PRODUCTION

Site builders often maintain two versions of their sites: the
production (published) version visible to the world, and the
development (staging) version visible internally.  Developers try out
changes on the staging site and push the pages to production once they
are satisfied.

The priorities for the staging site are rapid development and easy
debugging, while the main priority for the production site is
performance. This section describes various ways to adapt Mason for
each case.

=head2 Out mode

Mason can spew data in two modes. In "batch" mode Mason computes the
entire page in a memory buffer and then transmits it all at once. In
"stream" mode Mason outputs data as soon as it is computed. (This does
not take into account buffering done by Apache or the O/S.) The default
mode is "batch".

Batch mode has the advantage of better error handling.  Suppose an
error occurs in the middle of a page. In stream mode, the error
message interrupts existing output, often appearing in an awkward HTML
context such as the middle of a table which never gets closed. In batch
mode, the error message is output neatly and alone.

Batch mode also offers more flexibility in controlling HTTP
headers (see L<Devel/sending_http_headers>) and in handling
mid-request error conditions (see L<Request/clear_buffer>).

Stream mode may help get data to the browser more quickly, allowing
server and browser to work in parallel. It also prevents memory
buildup for very large responses.

Since Apache does its own buffering, stream mode does not entail
immediate delivery of output to the client. You must set $|=1 to turn
off Apache buffering completely (generally not a good idea) or call
C<$m-E<gt>flush_buffer> to flush the buffer selectively.

In terms of making your server seem responsive, the initial bytes are
most important.  You can send these early by calling C<$m-E<gt>flush_buffer>
in key locations such as the common page header. However, this dilutes
the advantages of batch mode mentioned above. Tradeoffs...

You control output mode by setting C<interp-E<gt>out_mode> to "batch"
or "stream".

=head2 Error mode

When an error occurs, Mason can respond by:

=over

=item *

showing a detailed error message in the browser

=item *

die'ing, which sends a 501 to the browser and lets the error message go to the
error logs.

=back

The first option is ideal for development, where you want
immediate feedback on the error.  The second option is usually desired
for production so that users are not exposed to messy error messages.
You control this option by setting ah->error_mode to "html" or "fatal"
respectively.

=head2 Reload files

Consider reload files only for frequently visited production sites.

=head1 CONFIGURING VIRTUAL SITES 

These examples extend the L<Mason/single site configuration>
example in B<HTML::Mason>.

=head2 Multiple sites, one component root

If you want to share some components between your sites, arrange your
httpd.conf so that all DocumentRoots live under a single component space:

    # httpd.conf
    PerlRequire /usr/local/mason/handler.pl

    # Web site #1
    <VirtualHost www.site1.com>
        DocumentRoot /usr/local/www/htdocs/site1
        <Location />
            SetHandler perl-script
            PerlHandler HTML::Mason
        </Location>
    </VirtualHost>

    # Web site #2
    <VirtualHost www.site2.com>
        DocumentRoot /usr/local/www/htdocs/site2
        <Location />
            SetHandler perl-script
            PerlHandler HTML::Mason
        </Location>
    </VirtualHost>

In handler.pl:

    my $interp = new HTML::Mason::Interp (parser=>$parser,
                    comp_root=>'/usr/local/www/htdocs'
                    data_dir=>'/usr/local/mason');

The directory structure for this scenario might look like:

    /usr/local/www/htdocs/  # component root
        +- shared/          # shared components
        +- site1/           # DocumentRoot for first site
        +- site2/           # DocumentRoot for second site

Incoming URLs for each site can only request components in their
respective DocumentRoots, while components internally can call other
components anywhere in the component space. The shared/ directory
is a private directory for use by components, inaccessible from
the Web.

=head2 Multiple sites, multiple component roots

Sometimes your sites need to have completely distinct component
hierarchies, e.g. if you are providing Mason ISP services for multiple
users. In this case the component root must change depending on the
site requested. Since you can't change an interpreter's component root
dynamically, you need to maintain separate Mason objects for each
site in the handler.pl:

    my (%interp,%ah);
    foreach my $site qw(site1 site2 site3) {
        $interp{$site} = new HTML::Mason::Interp
            (comp_root => "/usr/local/www/$site",
             data_dir => "/usr/local/mason/$site");
        $ah{$site} = new HTML::Mason::ApacheHandler
            (interp => $interp{$site});
    }

    ...

    sub handler {
        my $site = $r->dir_config('site');
        $ah{$site}->handle_request($r);
    }

We assume each virtual server configuration section has a

    PerlSetVar site <site_name>

Above we pre-create all Mason objects in the parent. Another scheme is to
create objects on demand in the child:

    my (%interp,%ah);

    ...

    sub handler {
        my $site = $r->dir_config('site');
        unless exists($interp{$site}) {
            # get comp_root from PerlSetVar as well
            my $comp_root = $r->dir_config('comp_root');
            $interp{$site} = new HTML::Mason::Interp(comp_root=>$comp_root,...);
            $ah{$site} = new HTML::Mason::ApacheHandler(interp=>$interp{$site},...);
        }
    }

The advantage of the second scheme is that you don't have to hardcode
as much information in the handler.pl. The disadvantage is a slight
memory and performance impact. On development servers this shouldn't
matter; on production servers you may wish to profile the two schemes.

=head1 AUTHOR

Jonathan Swartz, swartz@pobox.com

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<HTML::Mason>,
L<HTML::Mason::Parser>,
L<HTML::Mason::Interp>,
L<HTML::Mason::ApacheHandler>

=cut
