=head1 NAME

HTML::Mason::Component - Mason Component Class

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    my $comp1 = $m->current_comp;
    my $comp2 = $m->callers(1);
    my $comp3 = $m->fetch_comp('foo/bar');

    foreach ($comp1,$comp2,$comp3) {
       print "My name is ".$_->title.".\n";
    }

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Mason uses the Component class to store components loaded into
memory. Components come from three distinct sources:

=over 4

=item 1

File-based: loaded from a source or object file.

=item 2

Subcomponents: embedded components defined with the C<E<lt>%defE<gt>> tag.

=item 3

Anonymous: created on-the-fly with the C<make_anonymous_component>
Interp method.

=back

Some of the methods below return different values (or nothing at all)
depending on the component type.

The component API is primarily useful for introspection, e.g. "what
component called me" or "does the next component take a certain
argument".  You can build complex Mason sites without ever dealing
directly with a component object.

=head2 CREATING AND ACCESSING COMPONENTS

Common ways to get handles on existing component objects include the
L<Request/current_comp>, L<Request/callers>, and L<Request/fetch_comp> Request methods.

There is no published C<new> method, because creating a component
requires a parser. Use the L<Parser/make_component> Parser method to create a
new component dynamically.

Similarly, there is no C<execute> or C<call> method, because calling a
component requires a request. All of the interfaces for calling a
component (<& &>, C<$m->comp>, C<$interp-E<gt>exec>
which normally take a component path, will also take a component
object.

=head1 METHODS

=over

=item attr (name)

Looks for the specified attribute in this component and its parents,
returning the first value found. Dies with an error if not
found. Attributes are declared in the C<E<lt>%attrE<gt>> section.

=item attr_exists (name)

Returns true if the specified attribute exists in this component or
one of its parents, undef otherwise.

=item cache_file

Returns the data cache filename for this component.

=item create_time

Returns the time (in Perl time() format) when this component object
was created.

=item declared_args

Returns a reference to a hash of hashes representing the arguments
declared in the C<E<lt>%argsE<gt>> section. The keys of the main hash are the
variable names including prefix (e.g. C<$foo>, C<@lst>). Each	
secondary hash contains:

=over 4

=item *

'default': the string specified for default value (e.g. 'fido') or undef
if none specified.  Note that in general this is not the default value
itself but rather an expression that gets evaluated every time the
component runs.

=back

For example:

  # does $comp have an argument called $fido?
  if (exists($comp->declared_args->{'$fido'})) { ... }

  # does $fido have a default value?
  if (defined($comp->declared_args->{'$fido'}->{default})) { ... }

=item dir_path

Returns the component's notion of a current directory, relative to the
component root; this is used to resolve relative component paths. For
file-based components this is the full component path minus the final
piece.  For subcomponents this is the same as its parent component.
Undefined for anonymous components.

=item flag (name)

Returns the value for the specified system flag.  Flags are declared
in the C<E<lt>%flagsE<gt>> section and affect the behavior of the component.

=item is_subcomp

Returns true if this is a subcomponent of another component.

=item is_file_based

Returns true if this component was loaded from a source or object
file.

=item call_method (name, args...)

Looks for the specified user-defined method in this component and its
parents, calling the first one found. Dies with an error if not found.
Methods are declared in the C<E<lt>%methodE<gt>> section.

=item method_exists (name)

Returns true if the specified user-defined method exists in this
component or one of its parents, undef otherwise.

=item name

Returns a short name of the component.  For file-based components this
is the filename without the path. For subcomponents this is the name
specified in C<E<lt>%defE<gt>>. Undefined for anonymous components.

=item object_file

Returns the object filename for this component.

=item owner

Defined only for subcomponents; returns the component that this
subcomponent was defined in.

=item parent

Returns the parent of this component for inheritance purposes, by
default the nearest C<autohandler> in or above the component's directory.
Can be changed via the C<inherit> flag.

=item path

Returns the absolute path of this component.

=item scall_method (name, args...)

Like L<Component/call_method (name, args...)>, but returns the method
output as a string instead of printing it. (Think sprintf versus
printf.) The method's return value is discarded.

=item subcomps

With no arguments, returns a hashref containing the subcomponents defined
in this component, with names as keys and component objects as values.
With one argument, returns the subcomponent of that name
or undef if no such subcomponent exists. e.g.

    if (my $subcomp = $comp->subcomps('.link')) {
        ...
    }

Subcomponents are declared in the C<E<lt>%defE<gt>> section.

=item title

Returns a printable string denoting this component.  It is intended to
uniquely identify a component within a given interpreter although this
is not 100% guaranteed. Mason uses this string in error messages,
the previewer component trace, and C<$m->comp_stack>.

For file-based components this is the component path.  For
subcomponents this is "parent_component_path:subcomponent_name". For
anonymous components this is a unique label like "[anon 17]".

=back

=head1 FILE-BASED METHODS

The following methods apply only to file-based components (those
loaded from source or object files). They return undef for other
component types.

=over

=item source_file

Returns the source filename for this component.

=item source_dir

Returns the directory of the source filename for this component.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Jonathan Swartz, swartz@pobox.com

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<HTML::Mason::Request>

=cut
