=head1 NAME

HTML::Mason::Interp - Mason Component Interpreter

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    my $i = new HTML::Mason::Interp (data_dir=>'/usr/local/mason',
                                     comp_root=>'/usr/local/www/htdocs/',
                                     ...other params...);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Interp is the Mason workhorse, executing components and routing their
output and errors to all the right places. In a mod_perl environment,
Interp objects are handed off immediately to an ApacheHandler object
which internally calls the Interp implementation methods. In that case
the only user method is the new() constructor.

If you want to call components outside of mod_perl (e.g. from CGI or a
stand-alone Perl script), see the L<STANDALONE MODE> section below.

=head1 PARAMETERS FOR new() CONSTRUCTOR

=over

=item allow_recursive_autohandlers

True or undef. Default is true as of verison 0.85. If true,
autohandlers apply both to their own directories and all
subdirectories; if undef, only to their own directories. See the
L<Devel/autohandlers> section of the Component Developer's Guide for a
discussion of the pros and cons.

=item autohandler_name

File name used for autohandlers. Default is "autohandler". If
undef, Mason will not look for autohandlers.

=item code_cache_max_size

Specifies the maximum size, in bytes, of the in-memory code cache
where components are stored. e.g.

    code_cache_max_size => 20*1024*1024
    code_cache_max_size => 20_000_000

Default is 10 MB. See the L<Admin/Code Cache> section of the I<Admin Guide>
for further details.

=item comp_root

The required Mason component root. All components live under the comp_root.

You may also specify multiple component roots to be searched in the
spirit of Perl's @INC. To do so you must specify a list of lists:

    comp_root => [[key1, root1], [key2, root2], ...]

Each pair consists of a key and root.  The key is a string that
identifies the root mnemonically to a component developer.  Data cache
and object directories are split up by these keys to make sure
different components sharing the same path have different cache and
object files. The key is also included whenever Mason prints the
component title, as in an error message.

For example:

    comp_root => [['private', '/usr/home/joe/comps'], ['main', '/usr/local/www/htdocs']]

This specifies two component roots, a main component tree and a
private tree which overrides certain components.  The order is
respected ala @INC, so 'private' is searched first and 'main' second.

=item current_time

Overrides the time returned by $m->time with a fixed Perl time() value
(seconds since the epoch). On time-sensitive sites, this can be used
to set up port-based time/date simulations, e.g. a port that looks one
day into the future.

With no current_time parameter (the default), $m->time reports the
true time.

=item data_dir

The required Mason data directory. Mason's various data directories
(obj, cache, debug, etc), live within the data_dir.

=item data_cache_dir

Specifies an absolute directory for data cache files. By default, it lives
under C<data_dir>/cache.

=item dhandler_name

File name used for dhandlers. Default is "dhandler". If
undef, Mason will not look for dhandlers.

=item max_recurse

The maximum component stack depth the interpreter is allowed to
descend before signalling an error.  Default is 32.

=item out_method

Indicates where to send output. If out_method is a reference to a
scalar, output is appended to the scalar.  If out_method is a
reference to a subroutine, the subroutine is called with each output
string. For example, to send output to a file called "mason.out":

    my $fh = new IO::File ">mason.out";
    ...
    out_method => sub { $fh->print($_[0]) }

By default, out_method prints to standard output. (In a mod_perl
environment this is automatically redirected to the HTTP client.)

=item out_mode

Specifies one of two ways to send output, 'batch' or 'stream'.  In
batch mode Mason computes the entire page in a memory buffer and then
transmits it all at once. In stream mode Mason outputs data as soon as
it is computed. (This does not take into account buffering done by
Apache or the O/S.) The default mode is batch.  See the 
L<Admin/staging vs production> section of the I<Admin Guide> for a
discussion of the trade-offs.

=item parser

Parser object for compiling components on the fly. If omitted, creates
a parser with default parameters.

=item preloads

A list of component paths, optionally with glob wildcards, to load
when the interpreter initializes. e.g.

    preloads => ['/foo/index.html','/bar/*.pl']

Default is the empty list. This should only be used for components that
are frequently viewed and rarely updated.  See the L<Admin/preloading>
section of the I<Admin Guide> for further details.

=item static_file_root

Absolute path to prepend to relative filenames passed to C<$m-E<gt>file()>. Does
not require a trailing slash. For example, if the file root is
'/foo/bar', then C<$m-E<gt>file('baz/bap')> will read the file
'/foo/bar/baz/bap'. Undefined by default; if left undefined,
relative path names to C<$m-E<gt>file()> are prepended with the
current component directory.

=item system_log_events

A string value indicating one or more events to record in the system
log, separated by "|". Default is to log nothing.

=item system_log_file

Absolute path of system log.  Default is data_dir/etc/system.log.

=item system_log_separator

Separator to use between fields on a line in the system log. Default is ctrl-A ("\cA").

=item use_data_cache

True or undef, default is true. Specifies whether the $m->cache and
related commands are operational.  You may need to disable data
caching temporarily for debugging purposes, but normally this should
be left alone.

=item use_object_files

True or undef, default is true.  Specifies whether Mason creates
object files to save the results of component parsing. You may want to
turn off object files for disk space reasons, but otherwise this
should be left alone.

=item use_reload_file

True or undef, default is undef. If true, disables Mason's automatic
timestamp checking on component source files, relying instead on an
explicitly updated L<Admin/reload file>.

=item verbose_compile_error

True or undef, default is undef. If true, component compile errors are
followed with the full component source, annotated with line numbers,
to better interpret the error message. Does not affect runtime errors.

=back

=head1 ACCESSOR METHODS

All of the above properties have standard accessor methods of the same
name. In general, no arguments retrieves the value, and one argument
sets and returns the value.  For example:

    my $interp = new HTML::Mason::Interp (...);
    my $p = $interp->parser;
    my $comproot = $interp->comp_root;
    $interp->out_method(\$buf);

The following properties can be queried but not modified:
comp_root, data_dir, system_log_file, system_log_separator, preloads.

=head1 OTHER METHODS

=over

=for html <a name="item_set_global">

=item set_global ($varname, [values...])

This method sets a global to be used in components. C<varname> is a
variable name, optionally preceded with a prefix (C<$>, C<@>, or
C<%>); if the prefix is omitted then C<$> is assumed. C<varname> is
followed by a value, in the case of a scalar, or by one or more values
in the case of a list or hash.  For example:

    # Set a global variable $dbh containing the database handle
    $interp->set_global(dbh => DBI->connect(...));

    # Set a global hash %session from a local hash
    $interp->set_global('%session', %s);

The global is set in the package that components run in: usually
C<HTML::Mason::Commands>, although this can be overridden via the
Parser parameter L<Parser/in_package>.  The lines above, for example,
are equivalent to:

    $HTML::Mason::Commands::dbh = DBI->connect(...);
    %HTML::Mason::Commands::session = %s;

assuming that C<in_package> has not been changed.

Any global that you set should also be registered with the Parser
parameter L<Parser/allow_globals>; otherwise you'll get warnings from
C<strict>.

=back

=head1 STANDALONE MODE

Although Mason is most commonly used in conjunction with mod_perl,
there is also a functional API that allows you to use Mason from CGI
programs or from stand-alone Perl scripts.  In the latter case Mason can be
used as a glorified Text::Template, producing a set of
files from components, or used to generate a flat version of a componentized site.

When using Mason outside of mod_perl, just create a Parser and Interp
object; you do not need the ApacheHandler object.  Once you've created
an interpreter, the main thing you'll want to do with it is call a
component and do something with the output. To call a component, use
Interp's exec() method:

    $interp->exec(<comp> [,<..list of component params..>]);

where I<comp> is a component path or component object.

Component parameters are given as a series of name/value pairs, just
as they are with C<$m-E<gt>comp>. exec returns the return value of
the component. Component output is sent to standard output by default,
but you can change this by specifying C<out_method>.

Here is a skeleton script that calls a component and places the output
in a file:

    my $outbuf;
    my $parser = new HTML::Mason::Parser;
    my $interp = new HTML::Mason::Interp (parser=>$parser,
					  comp_root=>'<component root>',
					  data_dir=>'<data directory>',
					  out_method=>\$outbuf);
    my $retval = $interp->exec('<component path>',<args>...);
    open(F,">mason.out");
    print F $outbuf;
    close(F);
    print "return value of component was: $retval\n";

=head1 AUTHOR

Jonathan Swartz, swartz@pobox.com

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<HTML::Mason>,
L<HTML::Mason::Parser>,
L<HTML::Mason::ApacheHandler>,
L<HTML::Mason::Admin>

=cut
